Using the Fetch API
The Fetch API provides a JavaScript interface for making HTTP requests and processing the responses.
Fetch is the modern replacement for XMLHttpRequest: unlike XMLHttpRequest, which uses callbacks, Fetch is promise-based and is integrated with features of the modern web such as service workers and Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS).
With the Fetch API, you make a request by calling fetch(), which is available as a global function in both window and worker contexts. You pass it a Request object or a string containing the URL to fetch, along with an optional argument to configure the request.
The fetch() function returns a Promise which is fulfilled with a Response object representing the server's response. You can then check the request status and extract the body of the response in various formats, including text and JSON, by calling the appropriate method on the response.
Here's a minimal function that uses fetch() to retrieve some JSON data from a server:
We declare a string containing the URL and then call fetch(), passing the URL with no extra options.
The fetch() function will reject the promise on some errors, but not if the server responds with an error status like 404: so we also check the response status and throw if it is not OK.
Otherwise, we fetch the response body content as JSON by calling the json() method of Response, and log one of its values. Note that like fetch() itself, json() is asynchronous, as are all the other methods to access the response body content.
In the rest of this page we'll look in more detail at the different stages of this process.
To make a request, call fetch(), passing in:
a definition of the resource to fetch. This can be any one of: a string containing the URL an object, such as an instance of URL, which has a stringifier that produces a string containing the URL a Request instance
a string containing the URL
an object, such as an instance of URL, which has a stringifier that produces a string containing the URL
a Request instance
optionally, an object containing options to configure the request.
In this section we'll look at some of the most commonly-used options. To read about all the options that can be given, see the fetch() reference page.
By default, fetch() makes a GET request, but you can use the method option to use a different request method:
If the mode option is set to no-cors, then method must be one of GET, POST or HEAD.
The request body is the payload of the request: it's the thing the client is sending to the server. You cannot include a body with GET requests, but it's useful for requests that send content to the server, such as POST or PUT requests. For example, if you want to upload a file to the server, you might make a POST request and include the file as the request body.
To set a request body, pass it as the body option:
You can supply the body as an instance of any of the following types:
a string
ArrayBuffer
TypedArray
DataView
Blob
File
URLSearchParams
FormData
ReadableStream
Other objects are converted to strings using their toString() method. For example, you can use a URLSearchParams object to encode form data (see setting headers for more information):
Note that just like response bodies, request bodies are streams, and making the request reads the stream, so if a request contains a body, you can't make it twice:
Instead, you would need to create a clone of the request before sending it:
See Locked and disturbed streams for more information.
Request headers give the server information about the request: for example, in a POST request, the Content-Type header tells the server the format of the request's body.
To set request headers, assign them to the headers option.
You can pass an object literal here containing header-name: header-value properties:
Alternatively, you can construct a Headers object, add headers to that object using Headers.append(), then assign the Headers object to the headers option:
Compared to using plain objects, the Headers object provides some additional input sanitization. For example, it normalizes header names to lowercase, strips leading and trailing whitespace from header values, and prevents certain headers from being set. Many headers are set automatically by the browser and can't be set by a script: these are called Forbidden request headers. If the mode option is set to no-cors, then the set of permitted headers is further restricted.
GET requests don't have a body, but you can still send data to the server by appending it to the URL as a query string. This is a common way to send form data to the server. You can do this by using URLSearchParams to encode the data, and then appending it to the URL:
Whether a request can be made cross-origin or not is determined by the value of the RequestInit.mode option. This may take one of three values: cors, same-origin, or no-cors.
For fetch requests the default value of mode is cors, meaning that if the request is cross-origin then it will use the Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) mechanism. This means that: if the request is a simple request, then the request will always be sent, but the server must respond with the correct Access-Control-Allow-Origin header or the browser will not share the response with the caller. if the request is not a simple request, then the browser will send a preflighted request to check that the server understands CORS and allows the request, and the real request will not be sent unless the server responds to the preflighted request with the appropriate CORS headers.
For fetch requests the default value of mode is cors, meaning that if the request is cross-origin then it will use the Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) mechanism. This means that:
if the request is a simple request, then the request will always be sent, but the server must respond with the correct Access-Control-Allow-Origin header or the browser will not share the response with the caller.
if the request is not a simple request, then the browser will send a preflighted request to check that the server understands CORS and allows the request, and the real request will not be sent unless the server responds to the preflighted request with the appropriate CORS headers.
Setting mode to same-origin disallows cross-origin requests completely.
Setting mode to same-origin disallows cross-origin requests completely.
Setting mode to no-cors disables CORS for cross-origin requests. This restricts the headers that may be set, and restricts methods to GET, HEAD, and POST. The response is opaque, meaning that its headers and body are not available to JavaScript. Most of the time a website should not use no-cors: the main application of it is for certain service worker use cases.
Setting mode to no-cors disables CORS for cross-origin requests. This restricts the headers that may be set, and restricts methods to GET, HEAD, and POST. The response is opaque, meaning that its headers and body are not available to JavaScript. Most of the time a website should not use no-cors: the main application of it is for certain service worker use cases.
See the reference documentation for RequestInit.mode for more details.
In the context of the Fetch API, a credential is an extra piece of data sent along with the request that the server may use to authenticate the user. All the following items are considered to be credentials:
HTTP cookies
TLS client certificates
The Authorization and Proxy-Authorization headers.
By default, credentials are only included in same-origin requests. To customize this behavior, as well as to control whether the browser respects any Set-Cookie response headers, set the credentials option, which can take one of the following three values:
omit: never send credentials in the request or include credentials in the response.
same-origin (the default): only send and include credentials for same-origin requests.
include: always include credentials, even cross-origin.
Note that if a cookie's SameSite attribute is set to Strict or Lax, then the cookie will not be sent cross-site, even if credentials is set to include.
Including credentials in cross-origin requests can make a site vulnerable to CSRF attacks, so even if credentials is set to include, the server must also agree to their inclusion by including the Access-Control-Allow-Credentials header in its response. Additionally, in this situation the server must explicitly specify the client's origin in the Access-Control-Allow-Origin response header (that is, * is not allowed).
This means that if credentials is set to include and the request is cross-origin, then:
If the request is a simple request, then the request will be sent with credentials, but the server must set the Access-Control-Allow-Credentials and Access-Control-Allow-Origin response headers, or the browser will return a network error to the caller. If the server does set the correct headers, then the response, including credentials, will be delivered to the caller.
If the request is a simple request, then the request will be sent with credentials, but the server must set the Access-Control-Allow-Credentials and Access-Control-Allow-Origin response headers, or the browser will return a network error to the caller. If the server does set the correct headers, then the response, including credentials, will be delivered to the caller.
If the request is not a simple request, then the browser will send a preflighted request without credentials, and the server must set the Access-Control-Allow-Credentials and Access-Control-Allow-Origin response headers, or the browser will return a network error to the caller. If the server does set the correct headers, then the browser will follow up with the real request, including credentials, and will deliver the real response, including credentials, to the caller.
If the request is not a simple request, then the browser will send a preflighted request without credentials, and the server must set the Access-Control-Allow-Credentials and Access-Control-Allow-Origin response headers, or the browser will return a network error to the caller. If the server does set the correct headers, then the browser will follow up with the real request, including credentials, and will deliver the real response, including credentials, to the caller.
The Request() constructor takes the same arguments as fetch() itself. This means that instead of passing options into fetch(), you can pass the same options to the Request() constructor, and then pass that object to fetch().
For example, we can make a POST request by passing options into fetch() using code like this:
However, we could rewrite this to pass the same arguments to the Request() constructor:
This also means that you can create a request from another request, while changing some of its properties using the second argument:
To make a request cancelable, create an AbortController, and assign its AbortSignal to the request's signal property.
To cancel the request, call the controller's abort() method. The fetch() call will reject the promise with an AbortError exception.
If the request is aborted after the fetch() call has been fulfilled but before the response body has been read, then attempting to read the response body will reject with an AbortError exception.
As soon as the browser has received the response status and headers from the server (and potentially before the response body itself has been received), the promise returned by fetch() is fulfilled with a Response object.
The promise returned by fetch() will reject on some errors, such as a network error or a bad scheme. However, if the server responds with an error like 404, then fetch() fulfills with a Response, so we have to check the status before we can read the response body.
The Response.status property tells us the numerical status code, and the Response.ok property returns true if the status is in the 200 range.
A common pattern is to check the value of ok and throw if it is false:
Responses have a type property that can be one of the following:
basic: the request was a same-origin request.
cors: the request was a cross-origin CORS request.
opaque: the request was a cross-origin simple request made with the no-cors mode.
opaqueredirect: the request set the redirect option to manual, and the server returned a redirect status.
The type determines the possible contents of the response, as follows:
Basic responses exclude response headers from the Forbidden response header name list.
Basic responses exclude response headers from the Forbidden response header name list.
CORS responses include only response headers from the CORS-safelisted response header list.
CORS responses include only response headers from the CORS-safelisted response header list.
Opaque responses and opaque redirect responses have a status of 0, an empty header list, and a null body.
Opaque responses and opaque redirect responses have a status of 0, an empty header list, and a null body.
Just like the request, the response has a headers property which is a Headers object, and this contains any response headers that are exposed to scripts, subject to the exclusions made based on the response type.
A common use case for this is to check the content type before trying to read the body:
The Response interface provides a number of methods to retrieve the entire body contents in a variety of different formats:
Response.arrayBuffer()
Response.blob()
Response.formData()
Response.json()
Response.text()
These are all asynchronous methods, returning a Promise which will be fulfilled with the body content.
In this example, we fetch an image and read it as a Blob, which we can then use to create an object URL:
The method will throw an exception if the response body is not in the appropriate format: for example, if you call json() on a response that can't be parsed as JSON.
Request and response bodies are actually ReadableStream objects, and whenever you read them, you're streaming the content. This is good for memory efficiency, because the browser doesn't have to buffer the entire response in memory before the caller retrieves it using a method like json().
This also means that the caller can process the content incrementally as it is received.
For example, consider a GET request that fetches a large text file and processes it in some way, or displays it to the user:
If we use Response.text(), as above, we must wait until the whole file has been received before we can process any of it.
If we stream the response instead, we can process chunks of the body as they are received from the network:
In this example, we iterate asynchronously over the stream, processing each chunk as it arrives.
Note that when you access the body directly like this, you get the raw bytes of the response and must transform it yourself. In this case we call ReadableStream.pipeThrough() to pipe the response through a TextDecoderStream, which decodes the UTF-8-encoded body data as text.
In the example below, we fetch a text resource and process it line by line, using a regular expression to look for line endings. For simplicity, we assume the text is UTF-8, and don't handle fetch errors:
The consequences of request and response bodies being streams are that:
if a reader has been attached to a stream using ReadableStream.getReader(), then the stream is locked, and nothing else can read the stream.
if any content has been read from the stream, then the stream is disturbed, and nothing else can read from the stream.
This means it's not possible to read the same response (or request) body more than once:
If you do need to read the body more than once, you must call Response.clone() before reading the body:
This is a common pattern when implementing an offline cache with service workers. The service worker wants to return the response to the app, but also to cache the response. So it clones the response, returns the original, and caches the clone:
Service Worker API
Streams API
CORS
HTTP
Fetch examples on GitHub
