Wednesday, April 15, 2026
PM of Australia sends E-7A Wedgetail and air-to-air missiles to UAE
United States announces blockade on the Strait of Hormuz
US president Donald Trump demands the unconditional surrender of Iran
All articles in category
On Sunday, United States President Donald Trump announced on Truth Social that the US is imposing a blockade on the Strait of Hormuz. According to Trump, the blockade was in effect as of 10:00 a.m. Eastern Time (1400 UTC).
The blockade was imposed following the collapse of talks held in Islamabad between the United States and Iran.
"Effective immediately, the United States Navy, the finest in the world, will be BLOCKADING any and all ships trying to enter, or leave, the Strait of Hormuz," Trump declared.
According to The Guardian, oil prices briefly rose above US$100 a barrel following news of the blockade, before easing back to just over US$99; gas prices also increased.
Iranian parliament speaker Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf posted on X to "Enjoy the current pump figures. With the so-called 'blockade', soon you'll be nostalgic for $4–$5 gas." He further stated that Iran would respond in kind to both escalation and diplomacy, warning that it would "fight" if confronted militarily but would "deal with logic" if approached constructively.
China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs expressed hope that the ceasefire would remain stable, stating that Beijing is willing to cooperate with all parties to "guarantee the uninterrupted flow of energy supplies," and that stability in the Strait of Hormuz is critically important to China.
Have an opinion on this story? Share it!
Sources
Julia Kollewe. Oil price tops $100 a barrel after peace talks fail and Trump orders blockade — The Guardian, April 13, 2026
Lauren Edmonds, Huileng Tan, and Theron Mohamed. Oil surges past $100 a barrel after US-Iran peace talks fail and Trump threatens to blockade the Strait of Hormuz — Business Insider, April 13, 2026
'Enjoy it now:' Iran warns of painful oil price surge as Trump escalates blockade threat — The Times of India, April 13, 2026
China Reacts to Strait of Hormuz Blockade: Global Energy Security at Risk — IranWire, April 13, 2026
